HELM-248: Document Filters (#614)
OpenNMS/opennms-helm: docs/modules/datasources/pages/performance_datasource.adoc

= Performance Datasource

You can use the Performance datasource to retrieve performance metrics (for example, data collection and response time metrics) from the OpenNMS Measurements API.
For an example of the Performance datasource in use, see <<panel_configuration:dynamic-dashboard.adoc#pc-template-filters, Use variables to create dynamic dashboards>>.

== Query editor

This section lists the types of queries that you can build using the query editor.

=== Attribute queries

Attribute queries are used to extract data points from the time series data that OpenNMS collects and stores.

> You can specify which attributes or series are being queried.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify which attributes or series to query.
```
If this still makes sense.

=== Expression queries

Expression queries are used to combine or otherwise transform one or more series into a new series.

> They support the mathematical and conditional operators provided by JEXL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They support the mathematical and conditional operators JEXL provides.
```

Author: ```suggestion
They support the mathematical and conditional operators that JEXL provides.
```

=== Filter queries

Filter queries are used to create new series, or alter existing ones.
The options provided depend on the filter that you select.

[caption=]
.Filter query options
[options="autowidth"]
|===
| Filter Name | Description

| Outlier
| Removes datapoints that fall outside of the set quantile.
Defaults to 95%. +
The removed datapoints are replaced with interpolated values.

> |===

Author: GitHub wasn't happy about this suggestion, so I'll add it manually in a commit.

[[ds-perf-template]]

> == Template queries

Author: ```suggestion
== Variable queries
```

> You can use template queries in metric queries and panel titles.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use variable queries in metric queries and panel titles.
```

The results will appear as a drop-down list at the top of the dashboard; you can select from the list to change the data that the associated panel displays.

> For an example of a template query, see <<panel_configuration:dynamic-dashboard.adoc#pc-template-filters, Use variables to create dynamic dashboards>>.

Author: ```suggestion
For an example of a variable query, see <<panel_configuration:dynamic-dashboard.adoc#pc-template-filters, Use variables to create dynamic dashboards>>.
```

=== locations()

The `locations()` query returns a list of all available node locations.
You can use this inside a `nodeFilter()` query to filter the number of nodes displayed by location.

> .Example expressions using `locations()`

Reviewer 2: These examples don't actually show the use of `locations()` in practice. These are examples of a `nodeFilter` that happens to filter on location.

Author: ```suggestion
.Example expressions using `nodeFilter()`
```

[source,]
----
nodeFilter(location='Default')

> nodeFilter(location='$location')
> ----

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nodeFilter(location='$location') <1>
----
<1> This example assumes you have a `location` variable with a `locations()` query.
```

=== nodeFilter(<filterQuery>)

The `nodeFilter()` query returns a list of nodes which match the given filter expression.

.Example expressions using `nodeFilter()`
[source,]
----

> nodeFilter(catincProduction & catincLinux) <1>
> nodeFilter(location='Default' & catincProduction & catincSNMP) <2>
> ----
> <1> Returns the set of nodes that are in the `Production` and `Linux` categories.
> <2> Returns the set of nodes that are in the `SNMP` and `Production` categories and the `Default` location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nodeFilter(catincProduction & catincLinux) <1>
nodeFilter(location='Default' & catincProduction & catincSNMP) <2>
nodeFilter() <3>
----
<1> Returns the set of nodes that are in the `Production` and `Linux` categories.
<2> Returns the set of nodes that are in the `SNMP` and `Production` categories and the `Default` location.
<3> Returns all nodes in inventory.
```

Only one argument is available for the `nodeFilter()` query:

[options="autowidth"]
|===
| Argument  | Description

| filterQuery

> | Any valid node query syntax as used by core OpenNMS services (see the https://docs.opennms.com/horizon/latest/reference/configuration/filters/filters.html[OpenNMS Filters documentation]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Any valid node query syntax as used by core OpenNMS services (see the https://docs.opennms.com/horizon/latest/reference/configuration/filters/filters.html[OpenNMS Filters documentation]).
If omitted, all nodes are returned.
```

|===

> === nodeResources(<resourceId>[,textProperty[,resourceType[,regexFilter]]])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== nodeResources(<nodeId>[,textProperty[,resourceType[,regexFilter]]])
```

The `nodeResources()` query returns a list of resource IDs that are available on the specified node.
An optional second argument specifies whether to display the resource's ID, its label, or its name in the template value selector and elsewhere.
By default, the query displays the resource's ID.
An optional third argument specifies an exact `resource-type` name (for example, `interfaceSnmp`).
Passing a wildcard (`*`) allows for resources of all types to be returned.

> Regular expressions in the template query can be used to filter which resource IDs are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use regular expressions in the template query to filter which resource IDs are used.
```

Author: ```suggestion
You can use regular expressions in the variable query to filter which resource IDs are used.
```

.Examples of `nodeResources()` queries
[source,]
----
nodeResources(123) <1>
nodeResources(FS:FID) <2>
nodeResources(42, label, interfaceSnmp) <3>

> nodeResources(42, label, *, .*DPN.*) <4>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nodeResources(42, label, *, .*DPN.*) <4>
nodeResources($node) <5>
```

----
<1> Queries a specific node by its ID (`123`).
<2> Queries a specific node by its foreign source and foreign ID, formatted as a tuple.
<3> Queries node ID `42` for only SNMP interface resources.
The result displays the interface's resource labels rather than their IDs.
<4> Queries node ID `42` for all resources and returns items whose labels match the regular expression `\*.DPN.*`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<5> Queries for all resources on the node returned from a `nodeFilter()` query.
When requesting resources from a node based on another variable, the node variable should return only a single node.

```

The following arguments are available for the `nodeResources()` query:

[options="autowidth"]
|===
| Argument  | Description | Default Value

3+|*Required*

> | resourceId

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| nodeId
```

=== Filter queries

Filter queries are used to create new series, or alter existing ones.
The options provided depend on the filter that you select.

[caption=]
.Filter query options
[options="autowidth"]
|===
| Filter Name | Description

| Chomp
| Strips leading and trailing rows that contain nothing but `NaN` or `null` values.

| HoltWinters
| Performs Holt-Winters forecasting.

| Outlier
| Removes outliers and replaces them with interpolated values.

| Trend
| Fits a trend line or polynomial to a given column.

| JEXL
| Generic JEXL expression filter.

| Percentile
| Calculates percentiles.

| Derivative
| Calculates the derivative (rate of change) between rows.
|===

[[ds-perf-template]]
== Variable queries

You can use variable queries in metric queries and panel titles.
The results will appear as a drop-down list at the top of the dashboard; you can select from the list to change the data that the associated panel displays.
For an example of a variable query, see <<panel_configuration:dynamic-dashboard.adoc#pc-template-filters, Use variables to create dynamic dashboards>>.

=== locations()

The `locations()` query returns a list of all available node locations.

> You can use this inside a `nodeFilter()` query to filter the number of nodes displayed by location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create a variable with a `locations()` query and use that variable inside a `nodeFilter()` query to filter the number of nodes displayed by location.
```

.Examples of `nodeToLabel()` functions
[source,]
----
nodeToLabel($node) <1>
nodeToLabel(123) <2>
nodeToLabel(FS:FID) <2>
----
<1> Queries a template variable that represents a list of node identifiers.
<2> Queries specific nodes using their IDs or `foreignSource:foreignId` tuples.

=== resourceToLabel(<resourceId or nodeCriteria>[, <partialResourceId>])

The `resourceToLabel()` function converts an OpenNMS resource identifier, or a node criteria and partial identifier, into that resource's label.
The format of the resource's label depends on the resource type and can be anything from a node label to a descriptive string for an IP interface.

The single-argument form of this function expects a complete resource ID.
That resource ID must be the full resource identifier as queried to the OpenNMS Measurements API.
The two-argument form of this function lets you use template variables to specify a node and separately provide the remainder of the resource ID that you want to translate.

A partial resource ID is the portion of the resource identifier that does not identify the node itself (for example, `nodeSnmp[]`, `responseTime[127.0.0.1]`).

> For example, both of these calls translate into the same text:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, all of these calls translate into the same text:
```

[source,]
----
resourceToLabel(node[FS:FID].nodeSnmp[])
resourceToLabel(FS:FID, nodeSnmp[])
resourceToLabel($node, $interface) <1>
----

> <1> This assumes there is are variables called `node` and `interface` that are the result of `nodeFilter()` and `nodeResources()` queries, respectively.

Author: ```suggestion
<1> Assumes that the `$node` variable is populated with a value from a `nodeFilter()` query, and the `$interface` variable is populated with a value from a `nodeResources()` query.
```

=== resourceToName(<resourceId or nodeCriteria>[, <partialResourceId>])

The `resourceToName()` function behaves similarly to `resourceToLabel()`, but it returns the resource's name rather than its label.
The resource name is usually the resource's internal, machine-readable name (for example, a node criteria or an interface name and MAC address).

.Examples of `resourceToName()` functions
[source,]
----
resourceToName(node[FS:FID].nodeSnmp[])
resourceToName(FS:FID, nodeSnmp[])
resourceToName($node, $interface) <1>
----

> <1> This assumes there is are variables called `node` and `interface` that are the result of `nodeFilter()` and `nodeResources()` queries, respectively.

Author: ```suggestion
<1> Assumes that the `$node` variable is populated with a value from a `nodeFilter()` query, and the `$interface` variable is populated with a value from a `nodeResources()` query.
```
